---
layout: post
title: Assume good intentions
---
At a recent Stripe All The Hands meeting, one of {John, Patrick} Collison (I can’t be certain which, and there are so many Collisons at Stripe that it seems unreasonable to expect anyone to keep track of them both) riffed a little on the idea of assuming good intentions of those around you. My friends, family, long-time readers and members of my experimental hip-hop dance troupe will know that I don’t like giving anyone else any credit for anything I write about. Unfortunately, people other than me do sometimes come up with interesting ideas whilst 100 or so people that I am in daily contact with are also listening, and in situations like this I like to credit them for the seed of the idea, but make it clear that I was the one with the vision to see its full ramifications.

With that in mind, I would like to posit that when you tend to assume that those around you have good intentions, entire sets of problems simply vanish. It is simply true that most people very rarely actively mean to snub or ignore or belittle you. They’ve probably got other things on their mind. They just want to finish cooking dinner or announce the completion of a big project or have a good time with a randomly assembled subset of their friends. Even if they wanted to (and why would they?), they don’t have enough bandwidth to worry about making you feel like a chump. Sometimes this lack of attention is in itself a systematic problem with tangible consequences. But most of the time it isn’t.

Assuming that someone's curt, clipped tone was just a quirk of email communication, or of a bad night’s sleep, or just a random accident is different from assuming that it was deliberate but deciding not to care. Nonetheless, even if someone is purposefully trying to be unpleasant, does that even matter? Again, sometimes yes. But often no.

The shoe is frequently on the other foot. Of course, you are never deliberately malicious to anyone in any way and never mean to imply that any of your co-workers might be a serial arsonist. You always try to include everyone in everything, and always do your utmost to acknowledge everyone who needs to be acknowledged. But sometimes you make a mistake. You forget something or someone, or your brain stalls, or you choose an inopportune time to mention that you remember Steve having a barbecue on the same night that all his neighbours' cars were torched. And then you worry that the victim of your accidental disdain will feel bad. But you probably worry even more that everyone who heard you will think that you are a douchebag, until you explicitly apologise or otherwise distance yourself from your inadvertent buffoonery. However, if you can trust those around you to recognise this slip-up as the out-of-character mental fumble that it was, you suddenly don’t have to fret about any of these things.

If you make a really spectacularly egregious blunder, you still need to make it right. Any foul-up that requires reconstructive dental surgery to undo is probably not OK. But short of this, if your intentions were good and the damage is negligible then there’s no need for anyone to take offence when you aren't trying to give any. Again, this is not the same as not caring what people around you think. It is knowing that these people won’t think bad of you unless you have clearly been a top arsehole, so there is no earthly reason why you would care in the first place.

It feels a bit odd to formally ask your friends, co-workers and experimental hip-hop dance troupe to put their hands together and solemnly swear to default to trusting in each other’s good intentions. You probably shouldn’t do that. But as the bible says (probably), “what ye assume of those around ye, shall they assume of ye.” I have no evidence that this is true. But it seems plausible.

