---
permalink: /2014/07/28/strategy-operations-and-tactics/
layout: post
title: Strategy, operations and tactics
published: false
---
In lecture 8 (or thereabouts) of his wonderful Stanford lecture series, <a href="https://itunes.apple.com/us/itunes-u/history-international-system/id384240428?mt=10" target="_blank">"The History of the International System"</a>, James Sheehan discusses the different scales at which military activities are planned and carried out. This spectrum of high- to low-level concerns is traditionally divided up into 3 main categories - strategy, operations and tactics. Strategy is the translation of a political situation into military objectives. Operations is the manoeuvring of units and supplies in order to force the battles you want to fight. And tactics is the actual way in which a given battle is fought.

Sheehan points out that as armies start to lose wars, they lose the ability to make strategic and operational decisions. They can’t think about whether a war is likely to achieve their political goals. They struggle to bring the fight to the theatres in which they are strongest. All they can do is participate in the engagements that their enemy chooses to force, and do the best they can given the situation. No matter how good their tactics, this makes it incredibly hard for them to actually win. Until the very end of WWII, the Germans and the Japanese were still winning most battles. Despite being technologically crippled and in a hopeless position, they were still inflicting more casualties on the Allies than they were taking. But the Allies were winning the fights that mattered in the territory that mattered. They were playing on the operational and strategic levels, where an army can stomach local losses if they don’t prevent the accomplishment of their high-level goals.

This might actually not be a particularly nuanced observation, but I found it wonderfully thought provoking. Granted, it might just be an alternative definition of what it means to be “losing a war”. It may be that an army is losing if and only it is on the back foot and doesn’t have control of the strategic plane. This would make it technically equivalent to saying that as armies start to lose wars their opponents tend to start winning them. But alternative, tautological definitions can sometimes be just as illuminating as inferred, indirect consequences. After all, `sin(x)` equals `cos(x) * tan(x)`, but also `1/2 * (e^(ix) + e^(-ix))`.

The idea that being under pressure forces you away from high-level thinking can be fitted to almost any domain you can think of, especially if you are willing use a hammer and an angle grinder. When everyone and everything is assaulting you with rusty chainsaws fashioned out of pure stress (and rust), you aren’t able to give any thought to whether you may have chosen the wrong synagogue. You only have enough computational headpower to struggle back to the safety of your bed with your dignity intact. When you are suffering from an all-pervasive illness or condition that is flaring up at you like a volcano, you can’t sit back and take your whimsical, holistic approach to keeping it together because the volcano is somehow booting you repeatedly in your mental genitals. And to shoehorn in my contractually compulsory reference to some form of software development, when your codebase is fundamentally crap-on-a-sandwich, you can only worry about making each new class or method somewhat descriptive and clean in isolation. You have to keep fighting the individual bugs and quirks that keep apparating in your text editor, and don’t have the bandwidth to think about whether the reason they keep cropping up is because of the baboon-like foundations of your architecture.

It seems good to recognise when you are being locked out of strategy and operations. You can’t just declare a tactical moratorium, because the things you are tactic-ing against will promptly squash you, and then you won’t have anything left to strategise about. But you may be able to start sectioning off at least some of your effort for higher-level thinking, or just sue for peace altogether. Whatever that means.
