---
layout: post
title: "PFAB #11 - Separating logic and data"
tags: [Programming Projects for Advanced Beginners]
og_image: https://robertheaton.com/images/pfab-cover.png
redirect_from:
  - /pfab11
published: false
---
In this edition we're going to talk about how to reduce the number of bugs that it is possible to write in your code by reducing its *implicit dependencies*.

### What is an implicit dependency?

An implicit dependency is when one part of your code depends on another part, but doesn't tell anyone about it.

Implicit dependencies are especially pernicious when the first piece of code depends on some internal detail of the second piece, which the second piece had no idea that *anyone* cared about. The second piece might change the way that it handles its own internal logic, and have no idea that this will break the first piece.



Implicit dependencies are often defined much more precisely than this. These definitions might refer to links between functions or classes or libraries. However, I think it's useful for us to think more generally than this.

What do I mean by a "piece of code"? I don't have a precise answer. Lines of code clearly depend on each other all the time. It would be silly for us to complain that line 11 doesn't explicit register its dependence on lines 9 and 10.

You and your neighbour walk to work together. At the end of your road she turns left; you turn right. She presses the crossing button to stop the traffic; you assume that this will stop all the cars and dart across the road without looking so that you can get to the station on time. Your neighbour has no idea that you do this.

You have an implicit dependency on your neighbour pressing the button at the exact same time every day. This will work out fine, until the day when she decides to extend her walk to work, or realizes that she forgot her notes for the big meeting that day. Similarly, pieces of code with implicit dependencies will function perfectly until the day that something innocuous changes and they don't.

There are several ways you could resolve your implicit dependency on your neighbor's route to work. You could:

* Make the dependency *explicit* by telling her what you do and making her sign a contract promising to press the button at the same time every day forever
* Keep the dependency implicit but put extra guard rails around it by building a monitoring system that verifies that your neighbor presses the button and alerts you if she doesn't. The dependency is just as liable to break as it ever was, but at least now you'll have advanced warning.
* Refactor your walk to work by either using existing road-crossing infrastructure or digging a tunnel under the road





You will learn about how and why to explicitly link parts of your program together
Reduces the number and type of bugs that it is possible to write

By implicit dependencies I mean that two pieces of code depend on each other but don't have a clearly defined contract. Instead they rely on details of how they work and hope that those details don't change
"You just have to remember to make sure that..."

"You just have to remember to make sure that these two IDs are the same" is probably acceptable, especially if you have a script or a test that can parse your code to make sure that you didn't typo anything
"You just have to make sure to name this variable ID-Blah-Bloo" sounds like it's starting to get a bit too weird

Or when you have two or more pieces of data that clearly belong together but are stored in separate variables or places in your program
Think of the sorts of questions you might want to ask of your data in the near future and whether your data is structured to make those questions easy to answer

----

This is already great, obv
I don't write frontend code very much, so if someone you trust says that this is all nonsense then believe them. Lmk too.
I don't believe that the principles should be too different

I really liked Sophie's data structure right at the top of `app.js`
Clear separation of logic and data - if you want to add a new place then you just add it to the data structure and Sophie's code will take care of the rest. You don't need to care about how the code actually works, so long as you follow the structure Sophie has laid out

I want to take this further and change the way that her code internal represents data

Something that stuck out to me was how some related data wasn't explicitly linked
It was implicitly linked - two parallel pieces of code that assume that the other pieces behave in a certain way
All code makes assumptions about how other code works, but it's nice to be explicit about these things where you can
Makes it less likely that you'll accidentally change one part without changing the others, makese it easier to understand


Definitely tradeoffs to make - the current setup is more like a database



Similar assumption is in the code that triggers when a button is pressed
It passes in the value
We assume and require that the value be the same as the category name
This will probably end up fine, but it unnecessarily couples together the text on the button and the category name in the backend
Display and backend logic should be kept separate where possible
Weird if changing the text on the button broke something
So we add a data-category attribute that explicit represents the category that the button corresponds to


## Let's talk scaling

Scaling could mean lots of users or lots of places

I don't think I made any of this code faster
We can muse about what circumstances might make us worry about speed - lots of places
Then going through every place would be slow
We could separately keep track of which category is currently enabled and which windows are currently displayed, and jump straight to disabling them
Data that is currently hidden and should stay hidden could be ignored
Come up with an analogy of avoiding wasted work
All this work happens on the frontend, so doesn't depend on the number of users, only the number of places

If we had an enormous amount of data then we would load it from a backend
Don't want to have to load all our places data at once on page load - would make the initial page load stupidly slow and waste a lot of time
THIS DOESN'T mean that the current approach of loading it all is bad but it's OK because the project is small
The current approach is *correct* for a small project. Loading data dynamically from a backend database would be *correct* for large amounts of data. Everything depends.
This matters for number of places, but could also start to matter for number of users if we had lots of users all trying to load data from our database at once





For example, suppose that you commute to work by train. You get the train from Hometown to Middleville, where you change trains and go to Workington. Your "algorithm" for this journey is:

* Get on the 08:00 from Hometown on platform 2
* Get off at the fifth stop (which should be Middleville), go to platform 4, and get on the second train that arrives
* Get off at the third stop (which should be Workington)

You can perhaps guess what is concerning about this algorithm. It's very tightly coupled to the specific train schedule as it runs today. If there are 