---
layout: post
title: "PFAB #11 - Separating logic and data"
tags: [Programming Projects for Advanced Beginners]
og_image: https://robertheaton.com/images/pfab-cover.png
redirect_from:
  - /pfab11
published: false
---
For the next few weeks we're going to study a small web application called Eat/Play/Drink, created by Sophia Li. Eat/Play/Drink presents the user with a curated map of places to eat, play, and drink, and allows the user to filter places by category. It is written using JavaScript and HTML.

As with almost every program that we analyze here on PFAB, Sophia's program is already entirely functional and fully fit for purpose. You can even view it in action at [https://sophiali.dev/eat-play-drink]. The changes that we're going to consider would be important if the app was going to grow larger and be worked on by multiple programmers. For a personal side-project they're entirely optional, but are nonetheless good opportunities for learning.

Over the coming editions of PFAB we're going to look at how Sophie could restructure her code so as to make it harder for future programmers working on it to accidentally introduce bugs (Sophie-in-a-month counts as a future programmer!). But I want to start our journey by discussing a design choice that Sophie made that I particularly like: enforcing the separation of logic and data.  

### Separating logic and data

Let's start with a quick tour of the code (you can also [read it in full on GitHub][TODO]).

The basic HTML for Eat/Play/Drink lives in a file called `index.html`. We're not going to talk about this file much this week. The JavaScript logic lives in a file called `app.js`. This code is responsible for creating Google Maps markers and "info boxes", and for showing and hiding these components whenever a user clicks on a filter button.

[TODO-screenshot]

At the top of `app.js` is an array called `markers`. This array contains details about each place on the Eat/Play/Drink map, including a place's co-ordinates, category, and description:

```javascript
const markers = [
  {
    coords: { lat: 37.7638, lng: -122.469 },
    content:
      "<h3>San Tung</h3><p>Chinese restaurant with delicious dry fried chicken wings.</p><a href='https://goo.gl/maps/wiqva8qzW9bBoJRJ6' target='_blank'>Get directions</a>",
    category: "eat"
  },
  // ...etc...
}
```

I really like this array. It contains all of the website's data, keeping it completely isolated from the logic that is responsible for displaying it. This separation is valuable, for two reasons.

First, it's an almost-univeral good to keep different components of your code separate from each other, regardless of what those components are. As we've talked about at length in previous PFABs [TODO-LINKS], code that is well-separated into discrete components will, as a natural, inevitable consequence, tend to be easier to understand and work with. 

Second, separating logic and data brings additional, specific benefits. It means that we can add new places to the Eat/Play/Drink app without needing to go anywhere near the code that is responsible for displaying those new places. Instead, we can add our new places to the `markers` array using a simple, well-defined format. We can hit save and refresh the page, and the new markers and info windows are immediately available to be clicked on.

As well as improving our lives in the short-term, separating logic and data opens up extra possibilities for the future too.

### Future benefits of separating data and logic

#### Making data updates even simpler

With only a little extra work, we could make it even easier for anyone to update our app's code with new places, even if they aren't a programmer. Non-programmers could probably already add a new element to the `markers` array in a pinch, but it might be intimidating to ask them to edit a full JavaScript file that also contains functions, loops, if-statements, and so on. To alleviate this, we could move our places data to an entirely separate file (perhaps called `places.json`). This file would contain nothing but data, formatted as JSON, and wouldn't contain any JavaScript logic whatsoever. `app.js` would read and load the data, and then use it to perform all the presentation and other heavy lifting, just as it does today.

[TODO-pic]

Adding a few lines to a simple config file will be much less daunting than editing a file of JavaScript, no matter how well factored that JavaScript might be. Making this change would complete the process of hiding the complexity that turns raw data into maps and markers. However, we needn't stop there.

#### Making E/P/D reusable in different cities

Eat/Play/Drink is a delightful, simple application that is deliberately and sensibly laser-focussed on things to do in San Francisco. But what if Sophia's cousin, who lives in Austin (assume that Sophia has a cousin and that this cousin lives in Austin), wanted to make an Austin version of Eat/Play/Drink? He could copy the source code, but we would also have to send him a long, seemingly random list of files and lines that he would need to edit in order to localize it for use in Austin. If we made improvements to the core Eat/Play/Drink codebase, Franklin (assume that Sophia's cousin's name is Franklin) would have to manually copy them over and make sure that they didn't accidentally overwrite his Austin-focussed updates to the code.

Sophia's hypothetical cousin is probably very intelligent, and could probably figure out what to do given enough time. However, the more complex the app gets, the harder this migration will become. We should therefore go one step better. It would not take us much work to refactor the Eat/Play/Drink codebase into a generic, customizable framework that could trivially be reused by anyone to create an app to display their favorite places in their own city. Making this change would be a process of moving all of the San-Francisco-specific pieces of the application into a config file (like the `places.json` file described above), and having the rest of the application read this information from there. Adapting the app for Austin should then only require replacing the San Francisco config file with one for Austin, with no changes to the core code required. Even better, if Sophia were to make improvements to the core code, Franklin would be able to pull them in to his website without stomping over any of his Austin-based changes. Since all of his location-specific data is stored in the config file, updating the core code is entirely safe.

Which parts of the app are currently San-Francisco-specific? The places on the map (which we discussed above) are, of course. Add to this the co-ordinates where the map should be centred, the initial zoom-level of the map, the title of the home page, and the description text above the map. We also have to decide whether to stipulate that our app can only be used with the existing categories of `eat`, `play`, and `drink`, or whether to allow someone repurposing the app to choose their own categories, such as `run`, `bike`, and `swim`. If we made the latter choice, we would need to specify the categories in the config file too so that our app could generate the appropriate filter buttons.

[TODO-maybe-pic]

The config file might look something like this:

```json
{
    "title": "EAT PLAY DRINK",
    "description": "A list of the best places to eat, play, and drink in San Francisco, curated by a San Franciso native. Choose from the buttons below to filter your search.",
    "categories": ["eat", "play", "drink"],
    "map": {
        "center": { "lat": 37.7749, "lng": -122.4194 },
        "zoom": 12
    },
    "places": [
        {
            "coords": { "lat": 37.7638, "lng": -122.469 },
            "content":
            "<h3>San Tung</h3><p>Chinese restaurant with delicious dry fried chicken wings.</p><a href='https://goo.gl/maps/wiqva8qzW9bBoJRJ6' target='_blank'>Get directions</a>",
            "category": "eat"
        },
        // ...etc...
    ]
}
```

Once we've moved all the city-specific data into a config file, there are several ways in which we can pass it through to the application. We could write JavaScript in `app.js` that reads the data and dynamically inserts it into the page's HTML.

[TODO-pic]

Alternatively, we could write a script that reads the data and saves a new, static `index.html` file with the appropriate values filled in.

[TODO-pic]

The first approach is arguably conceptually simpler, but the second results in less JavaScript and therefore requires the user's browser to do less work. Both approaches will get the job done.

Next, let's consider other ways in which we could enhance the `markers` data structure. I'm not actually sure if this next suggestion is a good idea, but it's definitely educational so let's discuss it anyway.

### Extracting extra fields

You may notice that the `content` field of each element in the `markers` array always follows the same structure. For example:

```
<h3>Manna</h3><p>Hole-in-the-wall family-owned
Korean restaurant with the best tofu soup.</p>
<a href='https://goo.gl/maps/TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8'
target='_blank'>Get directions</a>
```

All `content` values contain a heading, a description, and a link to some directions. Can we exploit this consistency to improve our code? Maybe.

What problems are we trying to solve? Well, suppose that we wanted to change the `Get directions` link to instead say simply `Directions`. At the moment we'd have to go through each places's `content` field and manually update its value with the new link text. Or suppose that we wanted to allow someone not familiar with programming to add and update our data (as above). This person could probably copy-and-paste an example description and deduce that the words between `<h3>` and `</h3>` are probably a heading. However, this is a lot of logical inference to require of a person who only wants to make a note of a cool new coffee shop. In addition, there's a significant risk that they might accidentally delete a closing `</p>` tag or make some other typo. Come to think of it there's a significant risk that *I* would accidentally delete a closing `</p>` tag too.

To solve these problems, we could extract each component of the `content` field into its own field, and write code to join these new fields together into a fully rendered block. So in our `markers` data structure, instead of this:

```
{
  content: "<h3>Manna</h3><p>Hole-in-the-wall family-owned Korean restaurant with the best tofu soup.</p><a href='https://goo.gl/maps/TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8' target='_blank'>Get directions</a>",
  // ...etc...
}
```

We would write this:

```
{
  name: "Manna",
  description: "Hole-in-the-wall family-owned Korean restaurant with the best tofu soup.",
  directions_url: "https://goo.gl/maps/TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8",
  // ...etc...
}
```

We would then write code to join the above parameters and turn them into the same fully-rendered output (`<h3>Manna</h3><p>...etc...`) that was previously stored wholesale in the `content` field.

This approach has several advantages. First, it further separates data from logic and presentation. Currently the `markers` array is responsible for raw information, but also some elements of presentation, such as whether the title should be displayed in `<h3>` or `<h2>` tags. However, `markers` should ideally contain only raw information, and the components of our program responsible for displaying this data (i.e. the rest of the app) should be responsible for making cosmetic choices.

Second, as discussed above, it makes adding and editing data simpler. It means that editors don't have to know anything about HTML, and makes it harder for them to make silly typos.

However, the approach is not without its tradeoffs. By standardizing on a fixed structure made up of a set of fixed parameters, we make it easy to create info windows that follow this fixed structure. However, we also make it harder to create info windows that don't. Currently the structure of an info window is to start with a title, then one paragraph of description, and finish with a link to directions. If you instead wanted two paragraphs of description, or an image, or you didn't want a link to any directions, then you'd be stuck. You'd have to update the code that turns our parameters into info window text so that it accepts additional, optional parameters, such as `description_2`, `image_url`, `hide_directions_link`, and so on. If there are a sufficiently small number of these extra customizations then this might be a reasonable solution. But if there are a lot of them and you end up with twenty different configurable fields that sometimes interact with each other in surprising and complex ways (what should happen if `hide_directions_link` and `directions_url` are both set?) then you might find yourself wishing you had simply stuck with verbose, custom HTML instead of trying to make your life "easier".

I usually approach decisions like this by starting with whatever approach requires writing the least amount of code. Then I only add specialized features when I feel that I understand the problem that I'm trying to solve. A good way to decide whether it's worth investing in writing more code is to wait until the problems that you think the new code will solve have actually become problems. For example, I've claimed that splitting out the `content` field into multiple sub-fields will reduce the number of silly mistakes and bugs in the info window content, as well as making it easier to update the appearence of every info window at once. But how often have you actually introduced silly mistakes and bugs as a result of messing up HTML? And how often have you had to update the appearence of every info window at once? Was it really that annoying?

Don't solve problems that you don't have.

### Trying to be too clever

Suppose that we did decide to refactor our data file in this way. We split out the `content` field into separate fields for `name`, `description`, and `directions_url`. At this point we notice that every `directions_url` is of the form `https://goo.gl/maps/$UNIQUE_ID`, and that we could potentially save a few characters by replacing the `directions_url` field with one called `directions_google_id`, which contains only the unique ID in the `goo.gl/maps` URL. For example:

```
{
  name: "Manna",
  description: "Hole-in-the-wall family-owned Korean restaurant with the best tofu soup.",
  directions_google_id: "TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8",
  // ...etc...
}
```

If we went down this path then our info-window-building code would be responsible for turning `TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8` into `https://goo.gl/maps/TkAFCrGrswH76hmT8` before inserting it into the directions link.

Making this change would certainly reduce the number of characters in our config file, and would indisputably reduce duplication of the string `https://goo.gl/maps/`. However, in my opinion these are very small benefits that don't nearly outweigh the problems that it introduces.

For one thing, this change would make our config file less clear to read and update. "Create a `goo.gl` link but then chop off everything except the random characters at the end" is a more complicated instruction than "create a `goo.gl` link and copy it". Worse, it would unnecessarily encode in our program the assumption that we always want to get our directions from Google Maps. Since we are still early in the lifecycle of the Eat/Play/Drink app, this could easily change, and we want to stay as flexible as possible. Suppose that we decided that for some places, Bing Maps gave better directions. We could add yet another field called `directions_bing_id` and write even more code to turn this into a Bing Maps URL, but now we're starting to really add a lot more complexity for a nebulous gain. Wanting to save keystrokes is a good instinct, but isn't always a good idea.

There are no hard rules about how data should be decomposed into parameters. It's even easy to imagine further constraints that would make the above change a good idea. For example, maybe we're being paid by Google to showcase Google Maps, and maybe it's better for us to work with IDs instead of full URLs because this is the form in which Google sends us click statistics. You have to consider the tradeoffs for each individual case, and if in doubt err towards doing nothing.

----

TODO CONCLUSION SOMETHING SOMETHING THE END








