# Deleting Facebook

After 15 years on Facebook, I’ve deleted my account.

I didn’t do this because of Trump. I don’t know whether Facebook censors assholes too little or too much, and I find the question too difficult to get animated about. But Facebook’s constant and escalating privacy abuses have viscerally pissed me off for a long time, and I suddenly realized that however bad Facebook is today, they're only going to get worse.

Last week Facebook announced that WhatsApp would start sending itself all the names and numbers in your contact book and start using them to "help operate, provide, improve, understand, customize, support, and market our Services and their offerings”. You don’t need me to tell you what this really means. As far as I can tell this new policy doesn’t yet apply to Europe or the UK, which is where I live, but WhatsApp still started showing me an aggressive prompt requiring me to accept a new privacy policy or get the hell off their platform. I decided to try to get out of Facebook altogether.

I understand that the most egregious privacy abuses are likely perpetrated by companies I’ve never heard of. I understand that most of my personal data is already the property of hundreds of other companies with even worse controls than Facebook. I know that deleting my Facebook account won’t bring my data back home, and that if I want to truly regain my privacy then I’ll have to change my name and address and date of birth and hobbies and socio-economic background. I understand that deleting a Facebook account is an ineffectual gesture, but I still think it’s a worthwhile one. Even hostile platforms have sad network effects that bring and bind in more people who don’t really want to be there. You’d hope and imagine that these network effects apply in reverse too; the more people leave, the less everyone else is tied in. I’m happy to be one less ligament keeping other people on Facebook. As part of my migration process I inspired at least two other people to delete their own accounts. If they tell two other people, and they tell two other people, and two more people realize that none of their friends are around anymore so why should they stay, then we’ve got a viral loop but backwards.

Is that a roundabout way of describing a vaccine?

Deleting my Facebook account was surprisingly easy and I feel surprisingly happy for having done it. I migrated the few outstanding chats I had to Signal or SMS or email. I was reluctantly OK with WhatsApp as a fallback if absolutely necessary, since  even if you stay within the Facebook Inc. empire it’s probably better to shrink your footprint. Even the people who I expected to call me a tin-foil-hatted-dweeb were sympathetic to my motivations. No one actively wanted to stay on Facebook and very few people I co-ordinated with posted anything publicly anymore. We were all victims of those sad network effects who just wanted to be able to talk with our friends. But if all you want is a messaging platform then you have a million and one alternatives, some of which aren’t even wholly-owned Facebook subsidiaries.

Leaving Facebook was easy because I didn't get any value from it anymore. If you’re my age (early thirties) then I would guess that you have a couple of legacy chats open on Facebook Messenger, and you occasionally use the newsfeed to stay up to date with five people you spoke to twice at university and seven people who you are quite sure you've literally never met. There’s nothing wrong with these people and I’m glad that they have nice holidays and strong positions on Brexit, but knowing this doesn't make either of our lives better.

I started university in 2006. I had vaguely heard of Facebook and didn’t have an account, but as soon as I arrived the second-years advised me that I had to set one up immediately or I would have lunch and die alone. They were right; at university, Facebook was life. I assume things aren't like that anymore. I liked the way that Facebook allowed me to feel as though I had made connections with hundreds of people. I’m not sure this was beneficial to my mental health. Adding someone on Facebook felt much less awkward than asking for their number, and I got my first serious, multi-year girlfriend after a prolonged campaign of Facebook message banter. While writing this post I contemplated going back and reading our thread, but I couldn’t bring myself to. I want to remember the general feeling of being young, but not too many of the specific things I did or wrote that must have seemed funny or edgy at the time. I downloaded my Facebook data dump before hitting the delete button just in case I ever find myself old and bored and wanting to reflect on how vibrant and INCREDIBLY WACKYYYYYYY I used to be.

After university my Facebook use gradually shrank to near-nothing. I collected the bounties of likes from posting photos of my wedding and my first child, but I doubt that the payoff is as big for your second child or second wedding. I also posted my blog posts on Facebook, and back in the day I would get a handful of likes and friendly messages for each one. For my last few posts I got nothing, so either Facebook identified me as a spambot or the five people I spoke to twice at university and seven people who I have literally never met didn’t care for the direction my writing had taken.

I do like that Facebook is a global contact directory for anyone from my past. But I took a look back through my message history and I’ve only ever used Facebook to get in touch with old acquaintances once or twice, and email addresses usually aren’t hard to find. I seem to be the most internet-active Robert Heaton in the world so it’s easy to find my email from my blog via Google, but I do worry for Jim Smith. Last year my primary school teacher from when I was 7 got in touch over Facebook to see how I was doing; we exchanged a few messages. That was admittedly pleasant, but not worth the price of admission. Nonetheless, if Facebook ever make anything particularly useful or irreplaceable again then I can’t rule out the possibility that I'll try to make a fake account or ask Gaby if I can borrow hers if she still has it.

This must be a difficult time inside Facebook HQ. That said, no one ever says anything nice about Facebook beyond “React has gone a long way to uniting a fragmented JavaScript ecosystem”, so it’s probably always a difficult time inside Facebook HQ. I imagine that morale is low, but the stock price is high and the RSUs are unvested so management doesn’t have to worry too much. My own employer is pilloried on Twitter with what feels like increasing frequency, so - even though I do think we’re probably making the world a better place on balance, which is the nicest thing you’ll get me to say about anything - I won’t throw too many stones. I understand that at the end of the day we’re all just normal people trying to optimize our metrics and get paid a lot. Nonetheless, I do find it fascinating to imagine the kickoff meetings and daily standups for the projects with success criteria like “man-in-the-middle children’s iPhone traffic”, or “siphon users' data out of WhatsApp against their will”, or “import data about menstruation and use it for advertising”[LINKS]. I’ve never been asked to do anything particularly grimy at work, but if I was then I’d probably try to change teams and I like to think that if that wasn’t allowed then I’d leave immediately, without delay, as soon as I’d finished my stock vesting.

----

If you still find Facebook useful and the tradeoffs worth it then good luck to you. But my recent conversations suggest that you probably don’t and that you may have your own reasons for wanting to get off it too. Maybe you do think that Facebook doesn’t censor assholes enough. Maybe you think they censor them too much. Maybe you want back the minutes or hours per day that you spend doom-scrolling through your newsfeed. Maybe you don’t like who you are on Facebook, or who other people are. Maybe you’ve had enough of Facebook's data-purloining and anti-privacy shenanigans. Or maybe you don’t have any particularly strong feelings either way but your friends don’t use Facebook any more and you’re up for spending a few minutes cleaning up your digital footprint.

If so, I recommend it.
